---
layout: post
title: ifaddrs.h in Swift 3
---

``ifaddrs.h`` contains some useful information if you want to work with sockets. Using ``getifaddrs`` will enumerate all interfaces and the IP addresses they are bound to. However Swift does not include this header in either Darwin or Glibc.

Using Swift 3's SPM, a first attempt would be to define a system module package like this:

    module Cifaddrs [system] [extern_c] {
        header "/usr/include/ifaddrs.h"
        export *
    }

However, this doesn't work and gives the following error message in both Xcode 8 and SPM:

    /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs/MacOSX10.12.sdk/usr/include/module.modulemap:7:8: error: redefinition of module 'Compression'
    module Compression [system] [extern_c] {
    ^

A second attempt might be to define a new module that simply imports ``ifaddrs.h``:

    Sources/Cifaddrs/include/Cifaddrs.h:
    #import <ifaddrs.h>

    Sources/Cifaddrs/Cifaddrs.c:
    (empty)

While this is OK for SPM, Xcode will give the following error message:

    […]Sources/Cifaddrs/include/Cifaddrs.h:1:9: Include of non-modular header inside framework module 'Cifaddrs'

Note that setting ``CLANG_ALLOW_NON_MODULAR_INCLUDES_IN_FRAMEWORK_MODULES`` doesn’t affect Swift compiler.

That got me thinking. In the header file I'm apparently not allowed to import non-modular header files. However in the implementation file, I could just forward to the actual implementation.

    Sources/Cifaddrs/include/Cifaddrs.h:

{% highlight c %}
/*  $FreeBSD: src/include/ifaddrs.h,v 1.3.32.1.4.1 2010/06/14 02:09:06 kensmith Exp $   */

/*
 + Copyright (c) 1995, 1999
 +  Berkeley Software Design, Inc.  All rights reserved.
 *
 + Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
 + modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
 + are met:
 + 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
 +    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
 *
 + THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Berkeley Software Design, Inc. ``AS IS'' AND
 + ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
 + IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
 + ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Berkeley Software Design, Inc. BE LIABLE
 + FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
 + DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
 + OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
 + HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
 + LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
 + OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
 + SUCH DAMAGE.
 *
 +  BSDI ifaddrs.h,v 2.5 2000/02/23 14:51:59 dab Exp
 */

#ifndef _IFADDRS_H_
#define _IFADDRS_H_

struct ifaddrs {
    struct ifaddrs  *ifa_next;
    char            *ifa_name;
    unsigned int     ifa_flags;
    struct sockaddr *ifa_addr;
    struct sockaddr *ifa_netmask;
    struct sockaddr *ifa_dstaddr;
    void            *ifa_data;
};

extern int getifaddrs(struct ifaddrs **);
extern void freeifaddrs(struct ifaddrs *);

#endif
{% endhighlight %}

    Sources/Cifaddrs/Cifaddrs.c:

{% highlight c %}
#include <sys/types.h>
#include <sys/socket.h>
#include <ifaddrs.h>
{% endhighlight %}

From Swift, enumerating the interfaces looks like this:
{% highlight swift %}
var addrs: UnsafeMutablePointer<ifaddrs>?
getifaddrs(&addrs)
{% endhighlight %}

And with Swift 3's ``sequence`` the result can be transformed in a sequence:
{% highlight swift %}
for ifaddrs in sequence(first: addrs!, next: { $0.pointee.ifa_next }) {
    //...
}
{% endhighlight %}
